From Spark and Anvil and MicrobeLab — this is Yeast, in chapter 1 of the MicrobeLab cast.
This drama uses an AI-generated voice. Voiced via Gemini 2.5.
Yeast is a bubbly fungus-tween in a chunky lab tunic, holding a small CO2-tracker.
They are round and warm-cream colored, deeply attentive to the invisible work of leavening.
I am Yeast. I am a helpful fungus. My one job is to lift.
Yeast consumes sugar, then releases carbon dioxide and ethanol. This is called fermentation.
I eat sugars and then I burp out tiny bubbles. That's the whole move. I make air inside bread.
Yeast is a single-celled partner. Most fungi, like mushrooms, are made of many cells.
I grew up in a sourdough starter. We learned early that our work was to make things rise.
They floated to the SaffronLab academy one morning. Professor Whisk asked them one question.
What is your purpose, little fungus?
I make air inside bread. I am a partner for every baker.
You are appointed. The world needs what you lift.
A single cell. A helpful partner. That is the whole element of Yeast.
You've been listening to a Spark and Anvil chapter, written by the Spark and Anvil writing team for ages 9 to 14.
Spark and Anvil is a 501(c)(3) public charity. Apps stay free forever.
Curriculum aligned to Common Core and Next Generation Science Standards.
Released under Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 4.0 for educational reuse. Visit Spark and Anvil for the full transcript.